You are listening to radio lab radio from W N y.
S. E. N. N. P. R. Hello. Hello. Hello. Um,
how do I wanna introduce this tape to you? Okay. I'm not sure that,
have you heard this tape coach? I have not.
This is actually the first one of my first radio pieces.
You're not going to hear or saying as the run freefall. And uh,
I had two friends who are in love
with their helmets and I have since fallen out of love and fallen in love with
other people.
But at the time they were very much in love and they had decided they were going
to go skydiving together together. Everything looks good. You're ready for this?
Yeah, I gotcha. So this is my friend Jordan. He is getting into a plane.
All right, so let's check your harness.
It's got a mini disc recorder scrap to his chest and I should just say that the
piece and end up being really dumb,
but it contains the best moment of tape I think I've ever recorded and you're
going to hear it coming up. Okay. So as Jordan gets up into the sky,
if I don't ask myself, they're like seven thousand eight thousand fee.
I don't remember the number, but they opened the door
steps just to the edge and you'll hear this going to be a moment.
Just listen.
[inaudible] okay.
He is out of the plane now and he's hurling through space free
falling
within like few seconds. He's at a hundred miles an hour.
[inaudible] up to one 50
[inaudible]
175 miles an hour,
maybe 200 I don't know.
[inaudible]
there.
That was incredible. Oh my God.
That's the moment where the parachute opens.
Any is floating.
Yeah.
Oh, I haven't to the girl. I don't know. You don't know. Well,
her mini just recorded a malfunction in the way down,
but let's just rewind that back for a second.
[inaudible]
that transition right there from falling body to floating body.
Yeah.
I love that because at first he sounds like this dinosaur falling through the
air, but then the sound changes and it's just like,
I dunno. It's like this moment of somebody falling out of control
and then falling back in. Yeah.
Seems like a good way to open this show because this is going to be a show where
we take this idea of falling and we walk it in all kinds of different
directions, like poor outcomes we use to snap. That's one.
I loved him so much. That one. It's very dark.
It's very hellish. And that's what I was knitting. 81 packing.
Apparently communities there are 14,932 ways to fall on the radio.
In this hour we will bring you, I'm Jana. Boom. Rod.
I'm Robert Krulwich. This is radio lab and we are rolling.
Oh
[inaudible]
number one. This one.
This one is about, I don't what you call it, terror or just, no,
it's about time. Really time. Okay, so this it,
we'll just call this one falling time. How do you,
this is David Eagleman. Is David here? He's a neuroscientist.
But back when he was a kid, how old were you? Just to sort of, I was,
I was eight years old. He hadn't experienced, which he says changed his life.
Yeah. He was, uh,
playing in his subdivision in Houston and there was a house nearby that was
under construction and my father told me not to go climbing around on the house
center construction, but I was a boy.
So I did and I was looking at the edge of the roof and I stepped on it,
but in fact it was tar paper hanging over the edge and I, and I fell. Oh,
so you stepped onto the air. In fact, you just went away. Exactly.
[inaudible]
what happened was the events seemed to take a very long yeah,
time.
I thought about whether I had time to grab for the edge of the roof and I
realized it was too late for that.
[inaudible]
so then I was looking down at the ground as the red brick floor was coming
towards me and I was thinking about Alice in wonderland,
how this must be, what it was like for her when she fell down the rabbit hole.
[inaudible]
how long, by the way, was it from the top of the roof to the ground below
0.8. Six seconds. That's how long it takes to fall 12 feet.
I calculated that later.
That'd be one 1000 and this whole experience left David Eagleman with a question
that he could not get out of his mind.
What happens to people when they're in a life or death situation and they have
these thoughts that seem to take a long time.
So at some point I realized I needed to study this. How are you?
How would you even study that? Well, the first thing I did,
I took my entire laboratory to astroworld,
which is the amusement park here in Houston,
and we went on all of the scariest roller coasters.
We brought all of our equipment and our stopwatches and had a great time.
But it turns out, yeah, nothing
there was scary enough to actually induce this fear for your,
that appears to be required for the slow motion effect.
So I searched around and I finally found something called Scad diving.
Scad diving stands for suspended catch air device. Where do you do that?
It turns out it's illegal in Houston, but I found one in Dallas.
So we made a road trip up to Dallas.
All right, jumping number one.
And we actually found a reporter in Dallas who agreed to give us a try on,
and then I'll put this on over the harm. No one's ever died on this thing,
right? Nope. This is April. I feel like my heart's in my throat.
She's very brave.
You ride up to the top of this tower in this very rickety little elevator,
right?
Okay. We're rising up in the elevator right now. 150 foot tall tower.
Not too fast. Climbing up and up and up.
It doesn't seem that far when you're down there. Up here, it seems really far.
It's like a 15 story building ever halfway. Okay.
This is just halfway.
I'm already freaking out and my hands are starting to shake the very top.
You're suspended
like this? Yep. Okay. You're hooked up to a carabiner. Oh God. Okay,
so all the way back and back.
Okay, so I want you to imagine this. You're up in the sky.
You are facing the clouds, not the ground.
You are attached to something which is about to be severed.
And you will fall totally free into the void,
unable to see what's about to happen to you. Presuming a net.
Oh God. Okay. Let me die.
Three
to really nervous right now and [inaudible].
Okay,
wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. One thing I forgot to mention,
uh, April actually wasn't part of David's study, but is she had been,
she would have been wearing around her wrist, this little device,
new device called the perceptual chronometer.
That's about the size of a watch and it flashes numbers super fast. Yeah,
way too fast to see normally. But the thought is if April falls
and everything starts to sue down, well then these numbers should slow too,
so that if she looks at her wrist that she's falling, she should be able
to now read the watch.
That would be impossible under normal circumstances.
Back to April. Really nervous right now. Three to and
[inaudible].
Oh my God. Oh my God. Oh my God. This is scary.
Smoking in my life.
I should probably tell you guys the results of this study, but I just,
some people report that time slowed down enough for them to read the number.
I'm alive. No, no.
Turns out when you're falling you don't actually see in slow motion.
Ah, yeah. It's not equivalent to the way a slow motion camera would work.
Even though people feel like it's in slow motion.
It's something more interesting than that because here's the thing,
right after people did the jump,
he would ask them how long they thought their fall took the right answer.
If they'd had a stopwatch just under three seconds. But what people would say,
how long when you were calling, how long did it, 10 seconds. It felt,
felt like a turn at time with stopped.
So how do you explain that?
That like time's not slowing in the moment but seems to be slowing after the
moment? Well, I came to understand that it's a trick of memory.
Normally our memories are like sieves were, we're,
we're not writing down most of what's passing through our system,
but he thinks that when you go
[inaudible]
no life or death moment in that instant,
our memories go wide open because that's what memory is for.
It's for when everything hits the fan.
You want to write it down and remember it.
So all of it goes right to your hard drive. That clouds the feeling of the air.
Oh look, there's a guy in a blue shirt. So when you read that back out,
the experience feels like it must've taken a very long time.
It must have. Normally the trivial stuff gets dumped,
but in this situation it gets written
and then you realize how much trivial stuff is in there. So for example, I, uh,
I just recently interviewed a gentleman who had been in a motorcycle accident
and as his helmet was bouncing along off the asphalt,
he was composing a little song to the rhythm of his helmet. Balancing was,
was he in his helmet or had the helmet flown off? He was in his helmet.
That's, he was here before.
I get far too loudly was he at okay as a result of this bouncy was okay. Wow,
that's amazing. So his head was going boom, boom, boom.
And he's like, hey, it's kind of a good rhythm.
Kill your paste head
[inaudible] makes you smile
through the center.
[inaudible]
chasing rabbits
through the center.
[inaudible] [inaudible]
number two, falling in love from producer Lulu Miller. So set this up for us.
Well this is
a love story and in some ways it's a very typical love story and in other ways
it's just not yet. The girl is a really good friend of mine.
We're going to call her Serita and the boy will call Simon [inaudible].
When was the first time that you ever saw Simon?
Um, I don't remember the exact moment,
but I do remember sitting in the lunch room with the girls
at the table and sort of scoping out the boys and he was definitely the
skinniest. He just looked like a really nice guy,
olive skinned, thick hair,
and he made really good eye contact
to the point where it's a little flirty. There's no break
in the eye contact. It's like constant
to the point where I think it could be uncomfortable
for some people, but
I just really, I really liked it.
When was the first time you talk? Well,
we had a class together our freshman year.
We talked a lot in class and after class on the paths around campus and that's
how it went all freshman year, sophomore year, junior year.
They're sort of like particles that just kept colliding in the lobby of the dorm
on the sidewalk and each time it was new, new topic or a new idea. For instance,
one of them would walk by carrying a book Poisonwood Bible and the other one
would say, Oh, I love that book. Yeah, they just
click and again eye contact.
No,
we would talk and
be connected with the eyes
[inaudible]
that's what I really was falling for about him and there was like an
attentiveness beyond. I want to ask you one thing, which like you just said,
I'm falling for him. Is that the way it felt?
I mean people always say falling in love. Did it feel like falling?
Yeah, it does because it feels out of control.
And there's a moment where it feels like I let go and allow myself to feel it.
Totally. So there were some moments where she wondered,
she should. Yeah, like sometimes she'd walk by Simon on the path,
look up and smile and keep snuck me.
But then we run into each other and we talk.
She let herself start falling again. This is really fun in this moment.
And I realized years later that every time we ran into each other,
he has no idea that those were me. Really?
Yeah. Hi. Hello. Could you hear me? Vaguely. Yeah.
Um, can we start out talking about your condition? Yeah. What's it called?
Pros. OPEC. Nausea pros. Oh, peg nausea. Yes.
Sounds like a delicious fruit salad. It could be a cocktail. And what is that?
What is that word? Uh, let's see. Well,
Agnosia is a lack or an inability in Provo is the Greek for face.
Oh, face blindness. This of course is Simon.
There's a little piece of my brain that's missing and that I have a really,
really hard time recognizing faces, remembering faces. And how does that work?
Is it just that you forget where know people from? No,
if I passed it in the street, I can't swear that I've ever seen you before.
So he didn't know.
He couldn't string those together as all the same person having the same
conversation. Right. No Way. Even their first kiss,
he didn't realize he was kissing a girl. He'd actually known for years. Yes.
Yeah. So were you like totally shocked? I was totally blown away.
Who was that person to you? I knew it was the cheese plate girl.
Yeah. Not now. It was fieldhouse girl. So what did you say?
I think I just asked a lot of question. You know, she was interested in like,
oh, does this work? Yeah.
So I'm probably said if you went to the park and started looking at trees or
shapes are different, their sizes are different,
but to try to remember a thousand or 2000 of those, how do you pick it up?
It's just hard. It's just computationally difficult. Yeah.
What details did you know about her? I knew it was good to be with her.
The experience of being with her,
I think ran ahead of my sense of her biography.
So it was a leap. It was a leap. Yeah.
[inaudible]
let's try this.
Uh,
so they embark on this relationship, which, you know, has its quirks. Right.
Like for instance, if they were meeting up somewhere public,
I'm going to need to wave first. Hmm.
And backpacks is always gotta wear the same. One voice really helps.
But I would get a little bit anxious when we'd have to meet each other
somewhere. Yeah.
Because I knew if another curly haired girl walked there before I did.
I'm thinking, is that her like smiling way?
But it's just awkward. It's just kind of embarrassing. Yeah.
And somewhere along the line Serita found out that that eye contact that drew
her in, it wasn't really about her.
It was something he did with everyone on the off chance that they're his friend.
Wow. That's what I think the eye contact is. So did that,
did that make you step back at all? No.
By then I had already fell
and plus I think Serita at that time was getting really into Buddhism. Great.
And not just a little bit.
She went and lived with Buddhist nuns for a year in Sri Lanka.
And so the idea of impermanence and you know,
we think we have a self, but what really is a sell,
what it means to know someone. All of that was part of my world.
And so this idea that he didn't recognize me didn't seem so as important as the
present moment. It just kept coming on
[inaudible]
and then what happened? You graduate and then did you move in together? Yeah,
it was it in Philly. It was in Philly on street.
A year and a half goes by and then one day
I woke up and swear to God all the leaves fell off.
The trees fall turned into winter and Simon told Saritta it was over something
about a core that I'm lacking.
He said you were lacking a core. Yeah. What does that mean?
I don't know. I'm not sure what it means.
God, I knew the core would come up. The core of what I,
what I was trying to talk about was lingering doubt.
Whether,
whether this was it wondering could I fall further,
he just wasn't sure that he loved me and then at that point kind of backtracked
and denied having ever really loved me. Yeah.
Um, but that's how it was.
Did you feel like you at a certain point started to actually fall out of love
with him? Like, no, there was no falling.
It was just like I was at the bottom of a well sitting and stewing
high loved him. Yeah. So much.
And would you see him in the neighborhood cause you're still neighbors, right?
Right. Yeah.
We would see each other around at parties and he was working at a restaurant
that had an outdoor patio and I walked by there a few times without him knowing
it was me or I could see him and look at him.
But you got to just be hidden. Yeah. I got to just walk by.
Yeah.
So there is comfort in that. Yeah.
I didn't know. I didn't know that.
Yeah. It's hard somehow. Yeah. Um,
but I wouldn't that I would see her,
she, it's like she faded back into the crowd. Yeah.
Quickly.
I don't become lost.
It's actually haunting to me to hear that. Hmm.
[inaudible]
[inaudible] why you I gave
a think I'm fine
when I get that crazy.
[inaudible]
oh, that message is still there. Um, hi.
It's Lulu calling with a credit.
Radiolab is supported in part by the National Science Foundation and the Alfred
p Sloan Foundation enhancing public understanding of science and technology in
the modern world.
More information about Sloan at www that flown that board.
Radiolab is pretty psyched. W N Y C and distributed by s and P
and this message.
Hey, this is jad. We are celebrating a milestone over here at radio lab.
We have been invading your ears for 15 years.
Freaks me out just to say it. 15 years. We have been making radio stories,
high fi, crazy sound design, strange curiosity driven stories,
and a, we're celebrating. So check out our latest episode from the archives.
All of our episodes, wherever you get your podcasts.
Hey, I'm Jad Abumrad. I'm Robert Krulwich, Radiolab and today, uh,
today we're falling in many different flavors and we're at number three.
Next we have a story of a different kind of fall. All right, or father? Yeah,
it comes from science writer, David Coleman.
One article in particular that he wrote caught our attention. All right.
I'm going to quote you to yourself. Okay. Nowadays, chew enough.
We know quite a bit about cats. They'd been dissected in uncountable numbers,
their anatomy, their physiology, their behavior had been my neatly studied,
but there's so much we still don't know among all the other intractable issues.
One in particular interest to me and that is what's the terminal velocity of a
plummeting cat y.
Can you give me a little history of why? Why did that question interest you?
I mean, when I used to write for outside magazine,
I would browse through journalists and I would come across obscure papers.
How I happened upon the Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
familiarly known as J v a. M. A,
I don't know. I don't remember,
but I'm sure that that was the starting point because it was in that journal.
The David ran across a research paper. Yeah, like two vets,
Wayne Whitney and Cheryl.
Mel Hoff who worked in the mid town veterinary hospital and they noticed
that, um,
that in Manhattan there were a lot of cats falling out of windows high windows,
falling off ledges falling off roofs and what, what is it, what is a lot?
I mean, how many cats were coming into this place?
We saw 132 cats fall in a five month summer period.
And you're one 33 that's in her own house. She actually works in the, um,
in the veterinary hospital here at the Animal Medical Center and she's been
there since that research paper was written back in 1986 when I came to New York
City. I said, what do you mean cats fall out of buildings?
It doesn't make sense. I said, why would the cat fall out?
But we'll get back to her and just a little bit,
130, two and five months. That's almost a reign of cats. Well, no,
don't say that because I think people should visit New York without,
without receiving umbrellas. You too. What are you doing?
I'm doing the math to see how many that is in a week of, uh,
[inaudible] it's about, that's about a cat a day. It's a shame.
We can only be about that. But according to David,
it's actually not as much of a shame as you would think.
22 of the cats that they saw had fallen from eight stories or higher.
And out of those 22 only one died.
21 Katz survived from eight stories or higher. Wow. That's a long way.
And there was one cat that fell 32 stories and the cat had a little bit of sort
of thoracic bruising and a chip tooth and that was it. I mean,
how in the world do cats? I mean, we all know Kathleen on their feet. Yeah,
yeah, yeah. But how do they do that? Like these are not magical creatures. Wow.
If you go back about a thousand years,
they thought that they consorted with witches, with the devil,
and their reputation got darker and darker.
The more people started to distrust and dislike cats,
the more they started to do horrible things to them.
It would put cats in a barrel and then they went run the barrel through with
sword. Oh, I'm also throwing them out of windows. The defenestration of cats.
W what is a defenestration means throwing up the window.
Really an Estrus d o Jad. Add that to your active vocabulary today.
I plan to, so what would happen when they would defend a straight these cats,
the cats would land on their feet and walk away.
That made people even crazier.
No, of course we love our gas now we don't do that to our cats anymore.
But when we went to visit and back as a veterinary hospital,
we were asking her about the falling cats research paper, which is good.
The Feline High Road, the Feline, a High Rise Syndrome.
Then the mystery of how cats can fall from these amazing heights and survive.
Yeah. You've got a lot deeper. Yeah. Well, Pat's,
it felt less than five stories.
They did find she's not too bad cats or fell over nine stories.
They did find too, she's not so bad, which is weird, but cats,
it fell between five and nine,
five and nine floors had really serious injuries and had more injuries per cat.
Yeah, so cats, the fill a little ways. We're okay.
Castle fall a long ways where, okay, weirdly, but this five to nine thing,
so yeah. Yeah. What does that,
so we had to get a physicist to help us explain this.
This is where we get back to a qualm and called the terminal velocity issue.
Or here's how Ann put it to us. Well,
say you're living on the 30th floor of a building and it's summertime.
You get done at work at five, you go home,
get there about six the apartment's hot and stuffy and you open up those windows
and fluffy says, I'd like that pigeon out there.
And the next thing you know the missteps
[inaudible]
as the cat starts to fall, he's all disoriented and almost immediately,
probably within the first six feet, the cat's brain says, okay,
turn your front half over. Now bring your back legs around.
That's like instant cat can apparently do that move lickety split.
But the cat is still speeding up, going faster and faster. Three floors,
five floors, seven floors.
After falling about nine floors and accelerating to speeds up to about 60 miles
an hour, something happens.
You hit an equilibrium between the pull of gravity and wind resistance.
What it means is gravity is pulling down on you and the peak pole is between
five and nine floors for a cat. But after nine floors,
the wind resistance, which all the oil has been pushing back up on you,
starts to slow you down.
You don't speed up anymore. So that's your cruising speed.
That's your cruising speed. Yeah.
No.
After the cat's hit terminal velocity and the sensation of acceleration was
gone, they relaxed.
Did they sort of stretch out like a flying squirrel
and then they hit the ground belly flop.
And you're saying that because they hit the screws and speed and then relaxed
into the flying squirrel, the impact is less. Yes.
Yeah. And, and our record here, it wasn't in this paper,
but our record is 42 floors in the cat walked away. Wow. 42.
Is that a lucky cat or that just plain physics?
Should cats everywhere go to the 42nd floor before jumping out of the window?
No cat hands ever jumped out of a window. That's right. Stay indoors. No fluffy
back. [inaudible]
[inaudible]
okay, so the next, uh, falling, what are we gonna call these falling, uh,
falling volume nodes. Nova. Is there an f word you could use? Features. Yes.
Oh Great. Okay. Our next falling feature. Oh boy. Okay. No,
I mean it's just you.
We invited Columbia University physics Professor Brian Green into our studios.
I get to play with any buttons. Uh, yeah,
we wanted to ask him [inaudible] really one of the most basic questions you
could ask a physicist, why do we fall?
You know, we all know that wrote down
a law of gravity to calculate how gravity axa from one object to another.
Yeah. Like if you dropped your pen, that's right.
But there's a difference between being able to predict what will happen and be
able to explain why it happens. And Newton could not explain why it happens.
He could only tell you what would happen. But I mean,
how it works is it just pulls to the pen down. What does that mean though?
Has it pull it. I don't see anything between the table and your pen.
So what is the agent responsible for the pole? Um
Hm. This is something, even Albert Einstein himself couldn't quite figure out.
He was struggling to understand how the force of gravity works and it was a big,
big puzzle.
And the legend goes that Albert Einstein was walking around one day and he found
himself imagining a person riding in an elevator and all of a sudden the cable
gets cut and the elevator starts a plunge right down towards the earth.
Diversion I know is that he was actually sitting at his desk looking out the
window and was imagining window washers falling sorta from their scaffolding.
But it's the same, same exact idea. But anyway,
we were gonna stick with the elevator version are now Einstein.
Imagine this person standing actually on a bathroom scale in the elevator,
in the elevator. This was before the cable gets cut.
If the person is in the elevator standing on a scale,
they see that they weigh 160 pounds and then snip
when the elevator cables cut,
they looked down at the scale and the scale will drop to zero because the scale
will be falling away from their feet at exactly the same rate that their feet
are falling.
So their feet won't push on the scale any longer because this scale will be
moving downward with them. My mind,
I've imagined like the Hollywood movie where it's falling so fast,
everybody kind of drift up. That's right. So Einstein said to himself,
hang on a second, here's an environment
where in essence I can turn gravity off. Hmm.
Another way of saying it that flips it around and may make it more clear,
just as you can turn gravity off by snapping the cable,
you can actually simulate gravity by pulling on the cable.
That pulls that elevator up really,
really quickly because now the scale is running into your feet.
If you're standing on that scale, they won't read 160 it might read 250 huh?
It seems like gravity and being pulled up really fast.
They're the same thing. They are Jan, look what that look at you.
You just have the insight on your own. That's right. He walked,
he walked us 17 steps and I just made the last [inaudible] you did it.
You did it man. Wow. So whenever you're faced with a gravitational problem,
this allowed you to ignore gravity and translate it into a problem about motion.
Does that, does that solve the the what is gravity question? It just sorta, no,
he then had to make one more leap and it's not obvious how we took the final
step, but the final step was to realize that the,
what is gravity is the curvature of space and time.
That's illegal. I don't know what that means. This is a very difficult concept.
Do you understand it? I understand what Einstein w tells when he explained it.
He said, if you imagine the universe as a vast rubber mat,
a rubber mat held really, really taught, let's just take, oh,
I don't know. Let's take the earth and just plop it on to the mat.
So what just happened? Well then sunk into the rubber.
It's stretched the rubber, didn't it? Yeah.
I mean so the rubber is kind of curved around underneath it.
In Einstein's mind he thought maybe this is how to explain gravity.
This is what gravity is,
that curved shape of space he said and the pen falls because it's following a
contour in that curved space time environment.
So like if we're living on the curve then we're constantly falling down that
curve. Yeah. Yeah. We have no choice.
And the reason why right now I feel the chair pushing up on me is again,
my body also wants to slide down, but the chair's getting in the way.
So we're all sort of on some kind of slope sliding down unless we're that's
right. That's right. I like that. Yeah. I'm now an adherent to that theory.
Again, not knowing anything else. Now for number five,
should we call it falling fortunes or falling fortunes is a good one for this I
think. Yeah. Cause someone who's seeking fame and fortune and then
false. The idea of the a gravity hero, uh,
t to me, one of the things that it goes along with,
those are terms that was used. Gravity heroes. No, that's my term.
I like it though. It's a really catchy term. Well, thanks. Yeah,
this is Garrett Soden. He's an author, author of, uh, defying gravity,
original title falling, how our greatest fear became our greatest thrill, uh,
history and speaking of history and fears and thrills.
And I would add to that list tragedy he tells the following story.
It really started with, uh, Niagara Falls because up to that point,
people had done all kinds of things at night. Niagara Falls to back up.
It is the 1850s.
And at Niagara Falls you've got these two guys doing tight rope tricks over the
falls. Yeah.
A fellow named Charles Blondin name was French wire Walker and a Canadian guy
who called himself great Freeney and they would Duke it out, right?
London came out, strung a rope across Niagara Falls,
put a chair down, bounced on two legs and stood on it. Well,
one time he carried a guy over. He had to keep upping the ante. So,
so for his greatest trick,
he carried a small cast iron stove on his back with some firewood.
He got out there and he put the stove down, lit a fire,
had a couple eggs in a frying pan and made an Omelette right over this churning.
Like rapid. Yes. Wow. So the great Freeney came out with a washing machine.
That was his answer. Wanda, wash some clothes out there. Yeah.
The thing to know about these guys is this is basically just a show,
cause for example, the wire that they walked on,
it was pretty wide about the diameter of a coffee and really
they were just avoiding the big trick, the most anticipated trick,
the one that everybody was waiting for.
Well somebody going over the falls in the
barrel. The guy who did that would be the real gravity.
Whew.
You were walking whizzes. Niagara Falls is with be great forces of nature.
Every second,
600,000 gallons fall over the edge pound rocks below was such a fury that you
can hear it five miles away,
which is why in 1850 when PT Barnum saw the fall,
he said that if someone could figure out a way to go over that, that would,
that would be a huge stunt that would give them fame and fortune.
That's Joan Marie Shipman poet. She's a poet.
She's written a whole book for us about the first person to conquer the falls in
a barrel and it's called Queen of the myths clean in the mist, Huh?
Yup. So it wasn't a guy then? No,
I just said it was a guy to set you up so that you had asked me that question
because in fact it was a woman. Wow. Props to her. Thank you for acting.
The phrase, let's her name. Chad. Danny Taylor.
When we first meet any Taylor, this was 1901.
She was down on her luck because she, she'd been a, uh,
she'd done a lot of different things. She'd run a dancing school.
She had been a principal. She traveled all over the world.
Her only child had died, her husband right after that
and she was broke,
but then it hit her. She was sitting at home,
sitting your newer apartment in Bay city, Michigan. And uh,
for some odd reason she read an article about the goings on at Niagara Falls and
she decided she would go over Niagara Falls in a bear minimum. Why? I mean,
do we know she's looking to save herself from the poor house?
She was after money and when she read about these guys at Niagara Falls,
she thought this is it. Right? So she called a Cooper to build a barrel.
At first he refused to build it when he heard what her plan was.
But finally he did. And not long after Annie was on a train with her barrel
headed
to the falls, by the way. Yeah.
What Day are we talking about? Sure.
So we haven't danced in October 24th in 1901.
Okay. Word had spread. This was going to be a spectacle.
Everyone was there. Mobs of people, thousands up and down the river.
Tens of thousands and Annie shows up waving to the crowd wearing a very fancy
Victorian dress and a hat with ostrich feathers. Wow. She's quite the lady,
but then they go on an island. Yeah.
Where's she changes into some gym clothes and now she gets in the barrel.
They tow her out to the middle of the river and then they knock
and cut the rope
[inaudible]
and off she goes to the brain.
the roar of the river
enormous
and it's wet at my feet and I'm feeling while I'm in there that this is
miserable. The interesting thing is in Jones poem, she actually becomes, and I,
Kurt greened and spun, she's in the barrel getting hurled down.
The river tossed and turned. My brain told me,
and as she gets closer to the edge, it's about a half mile journey.
She begins to [inaudible]
hallucinate,
glimpse through the turbulence.
There was my young husband and his arms or baby rambling and the wind,
and then
this moment of weightlessness,
she's going down
into the pools below the great mass of foam and boiling water,
and then she shoots out again
through the buoyancy of the barrel, about 15 feet in the air.
Wow. The barrel crashes back
back down on the water, and then it floats
over to some rocks and rescue team paddle out to the barrel right away.
They get the barrel and they have to Assad open the crowd,
no doubt his thinking. That woman is dead.
There is nothing but a dead woman in that barrel,
but
when they pull her out out, she's alive.
[inaudible]
hi, I'm alive.
She took on this thing that the world was waiting for
[inaudible]
and she did it.
She was the first to ever try and Joan when she was pulled out of that barrel,
and presumably she's going to take the next step into fame and fortune.
What happened?
More or less, nothing.
She stepped out of the barrel and she didn't look right.
She didn't look like a hero. What does that mean?
Well, I've kept something from you coalition. What to think,
I haven't told you is that not only was she wet and soggy and according to
newspaper accounts, hysterical. And who wouldn't be?
She was 63. She was your grandmother.
She was an older lady. Like Joan said, you know, for the hero consuming public.
She just didn't look right
after that exhibition. Um,
her manager ran off with the barrel and he took the barrel and he started,
uh, going on the circuit with a lovely young woman.
Did he claimed was Annie Taylor? No. Much better showpiece. Oh, Yay.
What happened to Annie though?
She would drag herself to Niagara each spring and summer.
Sure.
Just sit on a street with a barrel. It wasn't the original barrel,
but it was a barrel and do what?
She probably had photographs of herself that signed.
And did she ever make any money off this nanny? No.
She died in a poor house, which is where she didn't want to wind up.
But that is where she wound up. And just 10 years later,
somebody repeats Annie's feet a man and he tours the world.
Bastard. Yeah. Bastard. But
because the heavens are Marissa fault during this guy's victory lap,
is he traveling around the world? He's,
he slipped his lift on an orange shrine in Australia or New Zealand.
Got a compound fracture of his leg. Huh?
She says that leg got gangrene and he died. Yeah,
there is. There is cosmic justice.
[inaudible] eh.
[inaudible]
hey,
we'll be right back.
These Fernando Los Angeles, California.
Radiolab is supported in part by the Alfred p Sloan Foundation.
He has the public understanding of science and technology in the modern world.
What information aboutSloan@wwwdotsloan.org
I'm Jan. I boom. Ron, are you asleep?
Hey. Hi. Do you even know where you are right now?
Did you see like my name with my leg while I kick myself awake?
Did you see that? I heard it. I'm Jad Abumrad Oh,
I'm Robert Krulwich and our next falling feature is falling asleep but with a
little kick. This is radio lab. Let's do it. Well,
tell me your name first and just tell me how you would like to be identified on
here. You can call me Fred. I like it the best. Okay.
My full title is Professor Frederick l Coolidge,
University of Colorado at Colorado Springs.
So just so we get our definitions right, what is a hypnic jerk?
It appears to be this, what seems to be a reflex. Everybody's experienced it.
It's, it's, you're still semi-conscious. Then you start to feel kind of dreamy.
You start to feel this loosening of your thoughts,
loosening of, of your reality.
But just as you're about to go under,
he says just that the first onset of sleep, Bam,
one big jerk, man, you're awake. Usually you wake up with this feeling of like,
oh my God, Oh my God. Oh my God. Oh, all right. And you know, wait,
how did you start studying this? I was working at Kentucky Fried Chicken.
Can I save it on the air for a dollar for a dollar an hour? And I just thought,
man, I still can't eat coleslaw to this day cause I would do a hundred pounds of
Coleslaw a day. So, um,
I saw this ad on campus and it said somebody to work in a sleep lab.
So I went and applied and I ended up in the beginning cleaning toilets.
But I just got into all asleep.
I thought it was fascinating and I got fascinated by these giant jerks at the
beginning of sleep. And I said, what is that? You know? And they say, oh,
that's a hypnic jerk. And I said, what is that? And they said,
that's a hip nature. In other words,
no one could really explain to him why these things happen. That's right.
So we started poking around and there were some theories, you know,
having to do with like physiological changes in your body, you know,
a lowering of oxygen content or something like this and your,
but that kind of explanation didn't really satisfy. It really doesn't say,
well why, what was its function? And, um,
as I started to look at the literature,
I saw that we had a very long history sleeping in trees.
If we go back to Australopithecus Afarensis, this is Lucy.
3 million years ago, Lucy was by Peatal, I mean walking on two legs.
Lucy lived in the trees. But unlike the other primates,
she would sometimes go down to the ground,
but on the ground you've got big birds, you've got snakes, tigers,
and rough times.
That ground life was stressful,
but at night she crawled up the tree for safety.
She climbs up in that tree, drops food there for her baby,
and she's going to drop off to sleep.
Her muscles loosen her hands on curl. She starts to have that relaxation.
Pretty soon she can't feel the tree under her back or cue the noises down below.
Stay with me, crawl with you. She feels like she's floating
or falling,
Lucy falling, falling. That means
it'd be a real good idea to wake up from that.
Sleep was such a dangerous proposition for so many millions of years that
something like to hip, knee jerk. If some of those primates had that behavior,
they may have been just slightly more likely over millions of years to to adapt
and survive. And we haven't gotten rid of it yet is what he's saying.
So that's my jerk is just basically so I don't get eaten by a lion all these
many years. Yeah, that's what he's saying. Sort of like a Lucy Echo.
Do we know this or we just the imagine? No. How are we going to know this?
This is just a story,
but there is at least one a tantalizing,
a bit of evidence to support this idea. You ask college students,
what are the most common that you have
and falling is number one or number two most common thing.
And if you go on a college campus, you know thanks to OSHA, right?
You have no chance of falling off anything.
They'll make sure that your fullest drop is like a foot or six inches.
Even then at big yellow and red signs all over it. But they dream of falling.
What?
And by the way,
the next most common dream after falling to being chased by an alien
in a blue dress, nobody is
des Yo way is to dawn
breast. You
[inaudible]
no.
Uh Huh
[inaudible]
[inaudible] [inaudible]
you're walking and you don't always realize it.
[inaudible]
but you're always falling. Well actually I've got,
I have a random one for you guys about falling. As I was driving over here,
I was thinking about it with each step neuroscientists, David Eagleman again,
you fall forward slightly and then catch yourself.
I started wondering what happened falling.
Why is it that elderly people fall down a lot?
If you go into any hospital ward,
you'll see lots and lots of elderly people who are in there with broken hips and
things like that because they've, they've fallen.
So I started asking my clinician friends and they say, well,
they have a poor sense of balance, muscle weakness, and I said,
could it have anything to do with timing? What do you mean? Well,
one of the things I study is how the brain sends out signals to the whole body
and how these signals come back because the strange part is the brain is
situated all the way at one end of the body all the way at the top end and it's
controlling this huge amount of machinery.
You have to send signals all the way out to the toes and all the way back and
they're surprisingly slow in the brain.
It's about 300,000 times slower than signals move around in a computer.
So it would be like if you were a NASA operator controlling the Mars rover,
there's a delay between when you send the signal
27 signals when you get the feedback and when you get feedback.
And so what happens is the brain is very,
puts a lot of effort into making sure that it knows exactly the timing of
sending signals out and when it's getting signals back and that's how you walk.
For example,
do you want the camera can take it the camera.
So this is like what toddlers learn in reverse,
aren't they learning the timings to get the left foot out in front of the right.
That's exactly what they're doing.
They're calibrating the timing of their whole nervous system.
That's interesting because my kids 10 months old and I think he's in this
calibrating stand. So what's happening with him now is he's standing,
but then it looks like he's about to take a step. But then right, it's about,
oh, sorry, that was a little spill. Yes, it's good.
So basically you're saying his little brain is trying to figure out the timing.
Let me see it. Oh, electricity racing from brain to foot and foot back to brain.
Yes. Mission control is going okay. Sending that message to the feet.
We expect it back in 300
[inaudible] fall. Take three. Okay, we're going to try now to 80 milliseconds.
Okay.
Two 80 girls ran down to ou tumble fall.
That's exactly right. A lot of trial and error until you get the timing right,
but get it right now you're a walker right
now.
Something that happens in let's say multiple sclerosis and maybe also when you
get old since David,
is that the timing starts to change because there's damage to the she thing
around the nerves and that slows down certain signals.
Then the brain says, oh, I thought my foot should've hit the ground by now,
but it hasn't,
so I'm going to send out a corrective motor command and then finally the signal
does come back and you've sat out this corrective Motor Command and you'll
stumble with each step.
You fall forward slightly and then catch yourself
some falling.
Now we are going to fall far from home.
We're going to have to travel a good many late years off the planet to fall in
this particularly special and gruesome way. Our father is Neil degrasse Tyson.
He's a astronomical physicist. Is that what he is?
Here he is at the Herbst theater.
I like saying that Harper Theater in San Francisco,
Sysco in front of an audience talking about a falling apart.
Um, my name,
my own business on the airplane and someone looks and sees what I'm doing.
They find out I do astrophysics, the outcome, the questions. When will life end?
Will the asteroid come? Will the Aztec calender destroy the earth? There's all,
there's, it goes on and on. It's,
I figured people like death in mayhem,
so I might as well title the book with that because there's a whole chapter on
how to die as you fall into a black hole,
which I personally think it's a kind of kind of cool way to die
because what happens is the gravity of the black hole it extreme.
As you can imagine, light doesn't even escape.
It's gravity is so extreme light traveling at the speed of light.
All right? So if light doesn't come out, nothing's coming out. It's black.
You fall in, you're not coming out. It's a one way trip. Okay,
so you don't just die cause you disappear. You,
you die long before you disappear. As you fall in,
the gravity at your feet becomes rapidly greater than the gravity of your head.
So your feet start falling faster than your head does.
That's a bad situation to be in.
You don't really know initially you kind of feel good, you know,
cause it's every you, we all stretch. When you wake up in the morning.
Initially it feels like a stretch.
But what happens is that stretch continues beyond comfort levels and you reach a
point where, and they're called the tidal forces, tides on your body. Basically.
The title force comes so great that they exceed the intermolecular forces that
bind your flesh.
And so the point comes where you snap into two pieces likely to happen at the
base of your spine. Now you are to pieces. Now. Now,
I know you didn't ask about this, but
it turns out you will survive that snap because below your waist,
while there are important organs, there are no vital organs below your waist.
So your torso will stay alive for a little while,
okay? Until you bleed to death.
But this all happens much faster than it would take to bleed to death.
So these two pieces then feel tidal forces and then they snap into two pieces
and then they snap again into eight and then 16 and then you're bifurcating your
way down. And so eventually it's your head and multiple other parts.
And so that will continue until you are a stream of Adam's descending toward the
abyss. And it turns out that's not the worst of it.
Okay? The worst,
it turns out the fabric of space and time funnels down towards a black hole.
So the space that you occupy up here is larger than a space you occupied down
here. So in fact, you're getting,
while you're getting stretched, you're getting squeezed,
extruded through the fabric of space like toothpaste too.
[inaudible]
well, we're, we're about to fall away. I think we can. Yeah. Okay. Nice.
One Nice one. Crow. It's falling apart before we do though. Uh, no,
that we have podcasts or radio lab.org Amgen, boom, rod.
I remember Kelly Pie.